V2 of embedded mode tutorial (with supporting `modes` guide) (#5771)
keystonejs/keystone: docs/pages/tutorials/embedded-mode-with-sqlite-nextjs.mdx

import { Markdown } from '../../components/Page';

# How to embed Keystone + SQLite in a Next.js app

> Keystone now supports SQLite! 🎉

Reviewer: Using the term "now" pins this content to a point in time. Every day that passes the "now" becomes less relevant. Can we reframe this in a more timeless way? Something like:

```
Keystone uses Prisma to interact with your data, which means we're about to support SQLIte database
```

> This makes it possible to run a local instance of Keystone from the same place you keep your frontend code and commit everything to Git. If you’re happy to write content in a local-only environment, and don't need a writeable API in production – this use case may be handy for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes it possible to run a local instance of Keystone from the same place you keep your frontend code and commit everything to Git. If you’re happy to write content in a local-only environment, and don't need a writeable API in production, this use case may be handy for you.
```

---

[Keystone Lite](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/tree/master/examples/next-lite) is a streamlined [mode](/concepts/modes) that you can operate Keystone with. It takes advantage of SQLite’s embedded local storage capabilities to give you a powerful CMS that you can run locally and store content in the same place you keep your frontend code.

The tutorial will show you how to:

- Setup a Next.js app
- Embed Keystone inside it, and run an Admin UI you can read and write to locally
- Create a simple Keystone schema with a `Post` [list](/apis/schema) that Next.js can build pages with
- Setup a secure read-only GraphQL API endpoint (and playground) that you can access in production
- Deploy your CMS and frontend monorepo to Vercel 🚀

?> If you need access to Keystone’s Admin UI over the internet, or want to provide access to more than one editor – use Keystone in [standalone](/concepts/modes#standalone-mode) mode.

## Setup a Next.js app

Start out by adding a basic Next.js instance in an empty project directory:

```bash
yarn create next-app my-project
cd my-project
```

### Add TypeScript

> Keystone Next is built in TypeScript. Adding it as a `--dev` dependency will make Keystone implementation easier later on. Let‘s get that out of the way now:

Reviewer: Current phrasing makes it sound like typescript is a burden.

```suggestion
Keystone Next is built in TypeScript. Adding it as a `--dev` dependency will make Keystone implementation easier later on. Let‘s do that now:
```

   ├── api
   │   └── hello.tsx
   └── index.tsx
```

### Start your local server

Run `yarn dev` at the root of your project. Next.js will generate a local server for you at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

![A browser showing the Home page of the default Next.js app](/assets/tutorials/embedded-nextjs/localhost-home-1.png)

## Add Keystone to your project

Now that we have the Next.js starter with static files, let‘s embed Keystone into the app to blend file-based content with content you can edit using Keystone’s intuitive Admin UI.

### Install dependencies

Add the following Keystone dependencies to the project:

```bash
yarn add @keystone-next/keystone @keystone-next/admin-ui @keystone-next/fields
```

### Update .gitignore

Add the `.keystone` directory to your `.gitignore` file. The contents of `.keystone` are dynamically generated at build time. You’ll never have to change them.

```bash

# in your .gitignore
.keystone
```

### Add Keystone to Next.js config

Add a `next.config.js` file to the project root with the following:

```tsx

// next.config.js

const { withKeystone } = require('@keystone-next/keystone/next');

module.exports = withKeystone();
```

> This is where the magic happens – the `withKeystone` constant lets Next.js encapsulate Keystone in its script runtime, but Keystone still operates independently of the Next.js frontend.✨

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the magic happens – the `withKeystone` function lets Next.js encapsulate Keystone in its script runtime, while Keystone still operates independently of the Next.js frontend.✨
```

### Create a content List in Keystone config

> Now add a `keystone.ts` [configuration file](/apis/config) to the project root with a simple `Post` [list](/apis/schema) type. This will give us the ability to create and edit blog records in Keystone’s Admin UI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now add a `keystone.ts` [configuration file](/apis/config) to the project root with a simple `Post` [list](/apis/schema). This will give us the ability to create and edit blog records in Keystone’s Admin UI:
```

```tsx
// keystone.ts

import { config, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

const Post = list({
  fields: {
    title: text({ isRequired: true }),
    slug: text(),
    content: text(),
  },
});

export default config({

>   db: { adapter: 'prisma_sqlite', url: 'file:./app.db' },

Reviewer: The `adapter` option is deprecated in favour of `provider`.

```suggestion
  db: { provider: 'sqlite', url: 'file:./app.db' },
```

  experimental: {
    generateNextGraphqlAPI: true,
    generateNodeAPI: true,
  },
  lists: { Post },
});
```

### Update package scripts

> Finally, make a small change to the `scripts` object in `package.json` to include Keystone‘s `postinstall`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, make a small change to the `scripts` object in `package.json` to include Keystone‘s `postinstall` script:
```

  return { props: { posts } };
}
```

Now add a `/post` subdirectory in `/pages` and include the code below in `[slug].tsx`. This will generate a new webpage every time you publish a new post entry in Keystone’s Admin UI.

```tsx
// pages/post/[slug].tsx

import Link from 'next/link';
import { lists } from '.keystone/api';

export default function Home({ post }) {
  return (
    <div>
      <main style={{margin: "3rem"}}>
      <div>
        <Link href="/">
          <a>&larr; back home</a>
        </Link>
      </div>
      <h1>{post.title}</h1>
      <p>{post.content}</p>
      </main>
    </div>
  );
}

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const posts = await lists.Post.findMany({
    query: `slug`,
  });

  const paths = posts
    .map(post => post.slug)
    .filter((slug): slug is string => !!slug)
    .map(slug => `/post/${slug}`);

  return {
    paths,
    fallback: false,
  };
}

export async function getStaticProps({ params: { slug } }) {
  const [post] = await lists.Post.findMany({
    where: { slug },
    query: 'id title content',
  });
  return { props: { post } };
}
```

Run `yarn dev` again.

**Congratulations!** 🙌 &nbsp; You now have:

> - A Next.js frontend blending static pages from your frontend repo

Reviewer: This doesn't quite make sense as is. Maybe something like?

```suggestion
- A Next.js frontend blending static pages from your frontend repo with dynamic content from your database
```

```tsx
// pages/api/graphql.tsx

export { default, config } from '.keystone/next/graphql-api';
```

This takes the fully functional GraphQL API that Keystone is already generating and makes it available as an endpoint and playground within the Next.js frontend app at [http://localhost:3000/api/graphql](http://localhost:3000/api/graphql).

![A browser displaying the GraphQL playground](/assets/tutorials/embedded-nextjs/graphql-api.png)

This gives you the ability to implement a search against the same content API you have running at build time, in run time.

## Bonus: deploy to Vercel

To get your project on the internet via Vercel hosting complete the following steps:

1. Commit your project to a repository in [Github](https://github.com/), [Gitlab](https://gitlab.com/), or [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/).
2. Login to [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) using an account from the services above.
3. Create a new Vercel project and link it to your newly created repository.

![A browser displaying the GraphQL playground](/assets/tutorials/embedded-nextjs/vercel-new-project.gif)

## Summary

> Keystone’s introduction of SQLite gives you the option to run a self contained CMS from the same place you keep your frontend code. While this option restricts read-write access to people who can run the project in local development, it has advantages with ease of setup, security, and web deployment. [Embedded mode](/concepts/modes#embedded-mode) is also a great way to deploy a read-only API on the web for content you manage on your computer.

Reviewer: Using the term `introduction` pins this content to a point in time. Every day that passes the "introduction" becomes less relevant that its "support".

```suggestion
Keystone’s support of SQLite gives you the option to run a self contained CMS from the same place you keep your frontend code. While this option restricts write access to people who can run the project in local development, it has advantages with ease of setup, security, and web deployment. [Embedded mode](/concepts/modes#embedded-mode) is also a great way to deploy a read-only API on the web for content you manage on your computer.
```
